The road, and THE HUNDRED, read aloud at 8b85b29 - before the prose pass.

Not a fixture. Nothing asserts this file; it is the before-state the prose
pass diffs against at E9, because every lint in prose.rs is a cheap
mechanical proxy and the one thing none of them can do is tell you whether
a voice landed evenly across fifty-three scenes.

Regenerate with:
  cargo test -p gearmaster-engine --test prose -- --ignored --nocapture read

================ THE ROAD, IN ORDER ================

TWO BY TWO  [the-toads-offer]  rung 3

    The Bog Toad has been sitting in this road since before you got up this
    morning and has clearly used the time.

    It does not want to fight you. It wants the square thing in your bag. It
    says square, it says two by two, it will not be moved on the shape and
    it will not say what it is for.

    It counts the gold out onto a flat stone while you decide. It counts out
    twice what the thing is worth. Then it counts the whole pile again, gets
    the same number, and seems mildly disappointed by that.

  > TAKE THE DEAL
      Hand over a 2x2 component. No fight, and twice the bounty on the stone.
      (shut) Nothing two by two in the bag. It checks. It counts the bag.

  > FIGHT IT ANYWAY
      It was going to be a fight before it was a negotiation.


BACK IN A MINUTE  [back-in-a-minute]  rung 4

    A man on the road hands you something to hold. He says his name is Wint.
    He hands it over the way you hand a thing to somebody you have known for
    years, and you have not known him for any years at all.

    He says he is going to get a drink and asks whether you are coming. You
    are not coming. Wint goes anyway, off the road and up the bank, and does
    not come back, and after a while it becomes clear that not coming back
    was always the plan.

    The wrapping is a page torn out of a star chart. Somebody has drawn a
    ring round a pub two towns up - the one that trades in words rather than
    money - and written HE IS RIGHT under it, and underlined it once.

  > Keep it
      Whatever Wint left you, it is yours now. So is the page it came in.

  > Leave it on the milestone
      Somebody will take it. Somebody pays for the trouble of not having it.


SUMP BOTTOM  [town, after rung 7]

    Sump Bottom is nine buildings on stilts and one that gave up. The water
    is at knee height in the street, and the answer here has been to raise
    every doorstep by a foot each year rather than deal with the water, so
    the doors are all at different heights and none of them are at yours.

    There is a chapel, a pub, a works, and a man selling out of a cart. The
    chapel bell rings at a quarter past instead of on the hour, because the
    tide moves it, and nobody has the heart to take that up with anyone.

    You have time for one of them before the water comes up.

  > THE CHAPEL
      The floor is stone and it cuts. A stack of Piety, which banks you a
    point of devotion before every fight from here on. Five stacks and it
    turns into something else.

  > THE PUB
      Nobody here takes money. They take what you are carrying, and what they
    give back is a rumour: a condition on a door that will not otherwise be
    there.

  > THE FACTORY
      One shift, and they pay on the hour. Twice what the last fight paid, and
    a stack of Tired: three mana of debt at the start of every fight for the
    rest of the run.

  > THE SHOP
      Whoever has the cart this week has five things on it that the road does
    not stock. He does take money, and he does want all of it.

  > THE WAY DOWN
      Steps, and under them a county. Five moves of it, once from this town,
    and what you clear down there stays cleared for the rest of the run. Not
    a door either, and it costs you nothing to look.


THE CASINO  [the-casino]  rungs 2 to 9

    The Parlour takes anybody who can walk in, which is how you got in.
    There is a bowl of complimentary salted rice by the door and a card over
    it reading ONE (1) HANDFUL - HONOUR SYSTEM - WE ARE WATCHING YOU TAKE
    IT.

    You are here for Hold-Em, played the way this house plays it: one card
    in the deck is a live wasp and no player may look at it. You have the
    gold. You have taken your one handful.

    At the third table along, two players have stopped playing Hold-Em and
    started on each other. The room has formed a ring around it. Marlow is
    working through the ring with a book, taking side bets in a very neat
    hand, and the dealer is standing perfectly still with the wasp held out
    at arm's length.

  > Step in
      Both of them at once. Marlow will want your name for the book first.

  > Keep out of it
      Not your table. Cash out, and take whatever the window gives you.


GERALD  [the-long-way]  rungs 2 to 9

    That last one took eleven seconds. You know it took eleven seconds
    because a man at the roadside was counting out loud, and when you
    finished he wrote the number in a notebook, said his name was Rowe, and
    said nothing else about it.

    Rowe's cart is ahead of you on the road, pulled by an animal with a
    brass plate on its harness. The plate gives the species, which is
    Draught Tortoise, and the name, which is Gerald, and the top speed,
    which is given in metres per hour.

    Gerald is hauling four tons of ore to Kettleworks. They set off in the
    spring. Rowe says they are ahead of schedule, and shows you the notebook
    again at a different page, as though that settles it.

  > Ask how he does it
      Rowe will not say on the road. He says catch them up when they get
    there.

  > Walk with them a while
      Gerald's pace, from here on. Everything slower, every plate worth
    double.


THREE THINGS IN THE SHRINE  [the-shrine-fork]  rung 10

    The Warded Idol stands in the shrine the way the Warded Idol always
    stands in the shrine: plated to the eyeballs, wound to the last click,
    entirely ready for you.

    There is also a hole in the back wall, which was not in the back wall
    when you came in. Down the hole is a seed line, three floors of it, and
    on the bottom floor an old analyst called Wenlock prays on stone that
    cuts his knees. He has been waiting a long while for somebody with
    shoulders.

    And there is a third thing behind the altar, asleep, with a shell on it
    like a walnut. Nobody who works here will look straight at it. The idol
    does not look at it either, and the idol has no eyes.

  > FIGHT THE IDOL
      The rung as written. It has been ready since before you were born.

  > FOLLOW THE THING YOU SOLD
      Three floors down, and Wenlock at the bottom with something to hand
    over.
      (shut) You never sold it, so it never came this way, so there is no hole in the
    wall.

  > GO ROUND THE BACK
      A boss, this early, and it leaves something behind when it stops.


THE TELLER  [the-teller]  rung 11

    There is a windowless store here the size of a county and its entire
    sign says LARGE. The man who owns it is Ollam. He has been carrying a
    story he is not able to put down, and he will pay to say it to somebody
    who is still standing afterwards.

    He has tried three people. Ollam describes what happened to all three of
    them in a level voice and with a great deal of sympathy, and then asks
    whether you are interested.

    He is not lying and he is not selling. What the story costs to hear is
    maximum health, for the rest of the run, and he says the figure out loud
    before you answer, because a man who has done this three times has
    stopped being delicate about it.

  > Hear it all
      The whole thing. He takes the best piece off his own back for it.

  > Hear the short version
      Half of it, and half of what half of it costs, and he pays cash.

  > Plug your ears
      Ollam takes it well. You keep what a head can hold, which turns out to
    matter.


THE THEODOLITE  [the-theodolite]  rung 12

    Three legs and a brass head, standing in the middle of the road with
    nobody near it. The head turns when you touch it and keeps turning after
    you stop.

    Look through it and the road is not what is in the eyepiece. What is in
    the eyepiece is a field with a stone in it, and a line ruled from the
    stone to somewhere out of frame, and the line does not move when you
    move the head.

    A hand-written card is tied to one leg. Ackworth, it says, and then:
    THREE LINES CROSS SOMEWHERE. THE CROSSING IS NOT MARKED. MARKING IT WAS
    NEVER THE POINT.

  > Take the card
      Ackworth's handwriting, and Ackworth's arithmetic on the back.

  > Take the theodolite apart
      Brass is brass, and you read the card on the way past.


THE BIGGER SIGN  [the-bigger-sign]  rung 13

    Ollam's store is behind you and has been for some rungs now. The thing
    that has been wrong about it the whole way is the sign.

    The sign says LARGE and it is nailed to a hoarding, and the hoarding is
    not the building. Behind the hoarding, further back and a good deal
    taller, there is a second sign, and the second sign says EXTRA LARGE.

    Nobody else on this road has looked up. Ollam's story takes the part of
    you that would have.

  > Follow the sign
      Off the road, round the hoarding, and in. It stands after the next rung.
      (shut) You heard Ollam out. Whatever part of you looks up is not looking up.

  > Forget you saw it
      Some knowledge is for selling, and somebody up the road is buying.


THE STOCKMAN  [the-stockman]  rung 14

    A man sitting on a gate counting something that is not there. Ketton, he
    says, when you ask, and then he goes back to it: he gets to sixteen and
    starts again, and Ketton has been doing it long enough that the gate has
    worn where he sits.

    Sixteen, he says, is how many places there are. Not sixteen animals and
    not sixteen fields. Sixteen places, in a ring, and the ring does not go
    anywhere - it goes round, and whatever is walking it has been walking it
    since before you asked.

    He will not say what is walking. He says you would not see it yet and
    that seeing it is a thing you have to be taught by a sign, and the signs
    are down there, and he is not going down there again.

  > Count with him
      Sixteen. Sixteen. It is not a long ring and it is not a fast walk.

  > Ask what he lost
      Two hundred head, over one winter, and he counts them still.


EXTRA LARGE  [town, after rung 14]

    It is one room. It is one room the size of a weather system, all ground
    floor and no windows, and the far wall is a rumour rather than a thing
    anybody in here has seen.

    The aisles are numbered and the numbers go past four figures. Aisle 9 is
    close enough to the door to walk to, which is the only reason anybody
    knows what is in it.

    In the entryway, between the doors and the trolleys, there is a stone
    pedestal with a socket in the top of it. The manager is called Mawes,
    and nobody who works here will discuss the pedestal, Mawes least of all.

  > AISLE 9
      Orbs, and two things that are not orbs and are shelved with them anyway.
    It is the only place on any plane that reliably has an Orb of Travel in
    stock.

  > THE RETURNS DESK
      They take anything back at what it cost, which nobody else does - or
    they will put it out on consignment and you will see it again three
    shops later, worth more.

  > THE SAMPLE COUNTER
      A free one. It is a common and it is genuinely free and whoever is on
    the counter would like you to take two.

  > THE MANAGER
      Mawes will confirm, at length and with documents, that this store is the
    only one, on any plane, and that the sign behind the sign is not a
    second store.

  > THE PEDESTAL
      It stands in the entryway and takes an Orb of Travel. Feed it one and
    you go where the orb goes and come back here. It is not a door and it
    does not cost you your one.

  > THE WAY DOWN
      Steps, and under them a county. Five moves of it, once from this town,
    and what you clear down there stays cleared for the rest of the run. Not
    a door either, and it costs you nothing to look.


HE IS STILL TALKING  [what-to-do-with-henpeck]  rung 16

    The Hollow King is on the floor of his own counting house with a broken
    hip and an excellent view of the ceiling, and he is talking.

    He has been talking since he went down. He has names. He has routes. He
    has the clearance order for the works, filed correctly, in triplicate,
    because he is exactly the sort of man who would. All three copies are
    available for the obvious consideration.

    He is having a marvellous time. He has asked you twice now whether you
    are getting all this.

  > LET HIM TALK
      He wants a witness and a promise. One more loss before the run ends.

  > FINISH IT
      The triplicate burns with him. You walk on angry and arrive angrier.


THE DISPENSER  [the-dispenser]  rung 17

    A machine at the roadside, humming, plugged into nothing anybody can
    find. Every light on it works. The whole front is lit up and every row
    is stocked and there is a bottle wedged sideways between the glass and
    the coil where somebody's last coin went.

    The one behind the red panel costs ten times what anything else in the
    machine costs. There is a small brass plate under it and the plate says
    WORTH IT, which is either a claim or a price.

  > One coin
      The cheapest row. It has been known to wedge.
      (shut) The slot wants a coin and you are counting lint.

  > The red one behind the glass
      Ten times the price and it comes out with ceremony.
      (shut) The red one is behind the glass and the glass has a price on it.

  > Shake it
      Free. Two might fall at once. Somebody might hear.


THE COMMONS  [the-commons]  rung 18

    Four posts in a line across open ground, and a fifth lying down, and
    nothing between any of them. It is the beginning of a fence and it has
    been the beginning of a fence for a long time.

    A woman named Yaxley is putting the fifth one back up on her own, badly.
    She explains without being asked that this is the fourth time and that
    the fence was never about keeping anything in.

    "There is a proper one further down," Yaxley says. "It goes all the way
    round something. Nobody who put it up is still alive and it has not
    fallen over once."

  > Help her with the post
      It takes two, which is why it has been down four times.

  > Ask what is inside the proper one
      Yaxley stops working for the first time since you arrived.


KETTLEWORKS  [town, after rung 18]

    You hear Kettleworks a rung before you see it. Two shifts, one working
    and one asleep, and they change over without either of them stopping:
    the sleeping shift is walked to the line by the waking shift and shaken
    awake at the machine.

    There is a board bolted to the gate. It says DAYS SINCE and then a
    number, and the number is 0, and somebody has chalked a small sad face
    beside it that has been rained on enough to have gone soft.

    They will take a pair of hands for an hour and pay properly for it. They
    will also take considerably more than an hour.

  > THE CHAPEL
      The floor is stone and it cuts. A stack of Piety, which banks you a
    point of devotion before every fight from here on. Five stacks and it
    turns into something else.

  > THE PUB
      Nobody here takes money. They take what you are carrying, and what they
    give back is a rumour: a condition on a door that will not otherwise be
    there.

  > THE FACTORY
      One shift, and they pay on the hour. Twice what the last fight paid, and
    a stack of Tired: three mana of debt at the start of every fight for the
    rest of the run.

  > THE SHOP
      Whoever has the cart this week has five things on it that the road does
    not stock. He does take money, and he does want all of it.

  > THE WAY DOWN
      Steps, and under them a county. Five moves of it, once from this town,
    and what you clear down there stays cleared for the rest of the run. Not
    a door either, and it costs you nothing to look.


THE CROWNWRIGHT  [the-crownwright]  rung 20

    Padgett the crownwright works out of one room over a fish shop and does
    not turn round when you come in, on the grounds that he can hear how
    full your head is from where he is sitting.

    "Full," he says. "Good. Most of them come up those stairs empty and want
    me to put something in it. I make hats. I am not a philanthropist and I
    am very much not a doctor."

    He will not sell you a hat. He will take a measurement, for the record.
    The record is a ledger four inches thick that lives under the bench, and
    Padgett will not let you look in it.

  > Stand still for it
      It takes a minute and he hums the entire way round.

  > Ask what he made last
      It is on the shelf behind him at head height. He has been waiting.


THE INSPECTION  [the-inspection]  rung 20

    Nance Twiss sets a folding stool down in the road in front of you, sits
    on it, and asks to see what you are wearing. She gives her name and
    nothing else about herself, and treats that as the whole of an
    introduction, which it is.

    She grades things. Rice for the trade board, and ropes before that, and
    she says the principle does not change between them and that people who
    think it does are the reason she still has work.

    What she is looking for is whether the things you have built agree with
    each other. She is entirely uninterested in whether any of them is good.

  > Show her everything
      Three of your items speaking with one voice. She has a word for that.
      (shut) She looks along the row twice and writes one word down and it is short.

  > Show her the good half
      Two that agree. Twiss grades the pair, and a graded thing is worth more.
      (shut) Nothing you own agrees with anything else you own. She notes it.

  > Decline the inspection
      She folds the stool and says, packing it, where else people are refusing
    this month.


THE TIMETABLE  [the-timetable]  rung 21

    Hesketh sells timetables off a folding table at the side of the road,
    for a line that closed before the road was cut, and she sells them at
    the printed price because she has never seen a reason to change it.

    The times in them are being kept, and Hesketh has checked. Every train
    on the sheet leaves the yard when the sheet says, and the yard is under
    your feet, and you have not heard a train because there are no trains,
    and the times are being kept anyway.

    She will sell you one. She would also, if you had something small she
    could use, take that instead, because the money is not the point and
    never has been.

  > Buy a timetable
      A rung's bounty. The printed price, which she is proud of.
      (shut) Hesketh does not do credit, and says so kindly.

  > Trade her something small
      A loose one-by-one. She turns it over twice and puts it in her coat.
      (shut) You have nothing small enough to be worth her while.

  > Leave the table alone
      The times will go on being kept without you.


AHEAD OF SCHEDULE  [where-it-was-going]  rung 22

    Kettleworks, twelve rungs and some weeks on, and there is Gerald in the
    yard with the harness off, eating.

    The four tons went in through the doors nine days ago. Rowe has been
    paid, has bought a hat with some of it, and is wearing the hat. He is
    extremely pleased that you asked.

    "Ahead of schedule," he says, for the second time in your acquaintance,
    and this time he has the docket for it, and makes you look at the
    docket.

  > Ask him again
      Whatever he did, he did by not stopping. Nothing starts fast.
      (shut) You never asked Rowe anything on the road, so he has nothing for you at
    Kettleworks.

  > Let them eat
      Gerald has earned that yard more than you have earned this road.


THE GREEN LEDGER  [the-green-ledger]  rung 23

    Creel has had the same column open for eleven years. He turns the ledger
    round so you can read the figure at the bottom. It is a large number and
    it is in green ink, because everything in this ledger is in green ink,
    including the corrections.

    The figure is roughly what you have put into the ground and pulled back
    out of it since the Cave Rat. Creel has been keeping count the whole way
    up, in fives, four strokes and a bar. He will not say who asked him to.

    "Sign it off," he says, "and it closes, and I go home, and my wife has
    been asking. Or put a line under it and it stays open, and I do not."

  > Close the column
      He is out of the door before the ink dries. The drawer under it is
    yours.

  > Add your own line
      Eleven years is not so long. Creel says so himself, twice.


WHAT THE TABLE SAID  [what-the-table-said]  rung 24

    Salter's inn at this crossroads has one long table in it and nobody sits
    at the middle of it, and nobody has for as long as Salter has held the
    licence. He will tell you why if you ask, in a tone that says he has
    stopped finding it interesting.

    Set a thing down at the centre and the table says what the thing is
    trying to become. Not what it is. What it is *for*, which is a different
    question and one nothing else in the world has ever asked out loud.

    It has been right every time. It has also, twice, been right about
    things nobody wanted to be right about.

  > Set a piece on it
      It speaks the task aloud, in full, and then halves it.

  > Keep your gear to yourself
      The table says nothing. It says nothing very pointedly.


THE CONTRACT  [the-contract]  rung 25

    A man called Braddock sets a document on a milestone and does not hand
    you a pen, on the grounds that people who need a pen handed to them do
    not sign. He underwrites. He says the word the way another man would say
    farriery.

    The clause is one line. Your gear runs cold for three rungs - all of it,
    every slot, no exceptions and no early exit - and if you are still
    upright at the end of the third one, they honour their side.

    Their side is four rungs' worth of gold and one loss underwritten: fall
    inside five rungs of collecting and the house eats that fall. Braddock
    gives both figures standing here, says you collect at rung 29, and does
    not offer to write any of it down.

  > Sign it
      Everything of yours runs cold for three rungs. All of it.

  > Walk past the milestone
      Braddock does not look up. He was not expecting you to.


THE SIGNAL BOX  [the-signal-box]  rungs 22 to 25

    The signal box stands on legs over the cutting and the man in it is
    called Ambrose and he does not look up, because the 21:14 is due and the
    21:14 is more important than you are, whatever you are.

    He throws the lever. Below you, in the dark, something heavy moves a
    foot and stops, and Ambrose writes a time in a book, and the time is
    21:14, and it is the right time.

    He will set the points for you if you ask. He sets them one way. He has
    always set them one way, and nobody has ever asked him which, and he
    would like it noted that you did not ask either.

  > Ask him to throw the points
      He writes you into the book. The yard is open, and he will not say what
    is in it.

  > Ask what runs on the 21:14
      Nothing. He knew that. The bounty again, for a question worth asking.

  > Leave him to it
      The 21:22 is due. He has already stopped seeing you.


THE MANSE  [town, after rung 25]

    The gate had no road behind it and now there is a house behind it, which
    is the sort of thing that stops being strange about four minutes after
    you notice it.

    Nobody in the Manse asks who you are. Two of them are eating and one of
    them is reading and all three of them are doing it in rooms you can hear
    but not find, because the doors here do not stay where they were put.

    There is a cellar, and the plate on the gate said HOLLIS, and nobody
    inside will answer to it. Everybody in the house knows where the cellar
    is and nobody in the house will take you to it.

  > THE CELLAR DOOR
      Stand at it and listen. Corvin, on the other side, sounds insane, and
    everything Corvin says turns out to be true, and the door is not locked.

  > THE GALLERY
      They will take one piece off you at twice what anybody else pays. If it
    was a good one, somebody will mention where the last one like it was
    fished up.

  > THE LONG TABLE
      Eat. A hundred more maximum health for the rest of the run, and the
    pudding is a universal constant.

  > THE LIBRARY
      One book, one piece, and the piece carries a curse of misfire for good
    and is worth twenty-five more for having read it. The book was worth it.
    Probably.

  > THE WAY DOWN
      Steps, and under them a county. Five moves of it, once from this town,
    and what you clear down there stays cleared for the rest of the run. Not
    a door either, and it costs you nothing to look.


THE BIRD PROBLEM  [the-bird-problem]  rung 27

    A courier called Pether hands you a memo. It is four pages, it is CC'd
    to three governing bodies, and its subject line is THE COMING
    TERRITORIAL WAR WITH THE BIRDS.

    Page two lists three potential outcomes. Two of them are bad. The third
    is described as 'bad, but ours', which is the sort of sentence that
    takes a committee eleven weeks.

    Page four is about armament and recommends racquets. The memo is absurd
    from end to end and it is also, past the next ridge and getting closer,
    entirely correct.

  > Arm up
      Pether has one spare and is glad to be rid of it.

  > Pay the toll
      One rung's bounty and the flock parts. Nothing follows.
      (shut) The birds do not take promises and Pether has stopped listening.

  > Ignore the memo
      It is four pages about birds. The next one arrives with company.


THE TURNTABLE  [the-turntable]  rungs 26 to 28

    The turntable is at the bottom of the cutting and it is turning. Nobody
    is on it. It turns a quarter of the way round, and stops, and a bell
    rings once in the dark, and it turns back.

    The yard goes off from it in two directions and both of them are unlit,
    and on the wall of the turntable pit somebody has painted DOWN LINE and
    UP LINE with an arrow each, and under the arrows, smaller, the words
    BUFFER STOPS AT THE END OF BOTH.

    Ambrose has thrown the points. You can hear them, thrown, somewhere out
    past the lamp. Which way he threw them is a thing you find out by
    walking.

  > Step onto the turntable
      Four fights on either line, and the line is your choice at the first
    points. What is at the buffer stop stays there until somebody takes it.

  > Sell the timetable to the man in the pit
      There is a man in the pit who collects them. The bounty three times, and
    the yard stays shut.

  > Come back up
      The turntable turns a quarter of the way round, and stops, and turns
    back.


THE ASTRONOMER  [the-astronomer]  rungs 18 to 29

    His name is Halloway and he has been thrown out of every observatory on
    this road, and thrown out of all of them for the same sentence, which he
    will say to you inside ninety seconds whether or not you ask him to.

    The sentence is that eleven stars this year have fallen against their
    own arcs. Not moved. Fallen - the way a thing falls when something with
    mass goes past it - and always in the same direction, and the direction
    is *down*, which is not a direction the sky has.

    His lens is cracked from the middle out. He says that happened on the
    eighth one, and offers the crack as the proof.

  > Hear him out
      It takes an hour and he does not stop to breathe. He is right.

  > Buy the lens
      Three times a rung's bounty. It is cracked and he wants that for it.

  > Turn him in
      Somebody up the road pays for madmen. The bounty again, and nothing
    else.


THE PAYOUT  [the-payout]  rung 29

    The house keeps its word and keeps it in an office, and the office is a
    table at the roadside with Braddock behind it and a ledger open at your
    column.

    He has been reading the column while you walked. He knows to the rung
    how cold you were and for how long, and he did not have to ask anybody.

  > Collect
      Four rungs' worth, and a name they will honour once if you fall.
      (shut) Your column is empty. He turns the ledger round so you can see that.

  > Walk on
      The table folds up behind you very quickly indeed.


MEMBERS AND GUESTS  [the-vip-area]  rung 30

    The rope is velvet. The man with the clipboard behind it is called
    Merrik, his badge says HOST, and Merrik would very much like to see the
    chip.

    Down the corridor behind him, past a door stencilled LINE 3 - AUTHORISED
    ONLY, there is a noise. It is the noise gear-folk make when they have
    been at something a very long time and nobody has told them when it
    stops. You were mined out of a cave. You know the noise.

    Merrik says there are five items on a table down there that have never
    been for sale, and that guests are always welcome, and that he will need
    your voice down and your hands where he can see them. He says the second
    half in precisely the tone he said the first.

  > Keep your face still
      Look at the table. Do not look down the corridor. Merrik checks.
      (shut) Merrik does not move the rope. Merrik has not moved the rope in eleven
    years

  > Get them out
      Two of them are paid to stop exactly this. It costs what that costs.
      (shut) Merrik does not move the rope. Merrik has not moved the rope in eleven
    years

  > Walk on
      Merrik thanks you for coming and means it, and holds the door for you.


THE WIZARD'S THIRST  [the-wizards-thirst]  rungs 8 to 31

    Sam the Wise wants vials. He wants cans as well and will take either and
    he is extremely specific about which shapes and entirely unwilling to
    say why.

    He has a hoard. He has shown three people the hoard and all three of
    them describe the same thing, which is a great many empty vessels
    stacked with real care in a room with the curtains shut.

  > Trade him one
      Triple what anybody pays, and he throws in a second chance at something.
      (shut) Nothing the right shape. He looks at your bag until you move it.

  > Refuse him
      He takes it well, and then something of yours runs cold.


THE BUYER  [the-buyer]  rung 32

    The man who buys is called Vell and he works out of a hired room with
    the door open and one chair set exactly far enough back that you have to
    walk in to sit on it.

    He does not sell. He buys three things and only those three: a word
    somebody told you, a title you are, and a hundred of your maximum
    health. None of them is gear and none of them has a price anywhere else.

    He is entirely honest about it. Vell says what each one is worth, to the
    gold, and the number is correct every time - and that, rather than the
    open door or the chair, is what makes the room hard to be in.

  > Sell him a word
      Six rungs' worth. The door it opened stays shut for good.
      (shut) You are carrying nothing anybody has told you. He is sorry to hear it.

  > Sell him a title
      Eight rungs' worth for something you are. He does not ask which.
      (shut) You are nobody in particular yet, which he says without unkindness.

  > Sell him a hundred of your maximum
      Ten rungs' worth. It does not come back and he says so twice.


HIGH WICK  [town, after rung 32]

    Above the smoke, finally. High Wick is one street on a ridge: a chapel
    at the top end, a pub at the bottom, a works that closed, and a shop in
    what used to be the works.

    Everybody here came up from somewhere worse and will tell you which
    somewhere if you stand still long enough. There is a wall of small brass
    plates in the pub with names on them, and nobody will explain the wall.

    Nobody asks what you are climbing towards. They have all watched
    somebody go past on the way to it.

  > THE CHAPEL
      The floor is stone and it cuts. A stack of Piety, which banks you a
    point of devotion before every fight from here on. Five stacks and it
    turns into something else.

  > THE PUB
      Nobody here takes money. They take what you are carrying, and what they
    give back is a rumour: a condition on a door that will not otherwise be
    there.

  > THE FACTORY
      One shift, and they pay on the hour. Twice what the last fight paid, and
    a stack of Tired: three mana of debt at the start of every fight for the
    rest of the run.

  > THE SHOP
      Whoever has the cart this week has five things on it that the road does
    not stock. He does take money, and he does want all of it.

  > THE PEDESTAL
      It stands in the entryway and takes an Orb of Travel. Feed it one and
    you go where the orb goes and come back here. It is not a door and it
    does not cost you your one.

  > THE WAY DOWN
      Steps, and under them a county. Five moves of it, once from this town,
    and what you clear down there stays cleared for the rest of the run. Not
    a door either, and it costs you nothing to look.


THE EXHIBITION  [the-exhibition]  rungs 19 to 34

    Dorn and Ilder were the two finest players the ring game ever had. They
    are both retired now and are, between them, about as bored as it is
    possible for two people to be.

    They want a demonstration bout. Two of them, one of you, in front of
    whoever is passing, at exhibition stakes - which means nobody is going
    to be seriously hurt and everybody is going to be seen.

  > Give them a bout
      Top of the bill, two on one. Losing costs this rung's purse and nothing
    else.
      (shut) Ilder looks at what you have built and is far too polite about it.

  > Decline politely
      Dorn says that is fair. Ilder does not say that is fair.


THE LAST TRAIN  [the-last-train]  rung 34

    Ambrose is on the road. He has never been on the road. He has the book
    under his arm and the lever is not in the box any more, because the box
    is not there any more, because the last train ran at 02:40 this morning
    and it took the box with it.

    He wants to know how far down the yard you went, and Ambrose writes the
    answer in the book without looking at the page, in a hand that has
    written the same eleven times a day for longer than there has been a
    road.

    There was one more train on the sheet. There was always one more train
    on the sheet. Ambrose says the sheet was right about that too.

  > Tell him both lines
      You walked the yard twice. He closes the book. Three times the bounty,
    and your next loss inside five rungs does not count.
      (shut) You walked one line. Ambrose knows, because he threw the points.

  > Tell him one line
      He writes it down. The bounty again, and a nod.
      (shut) You did not go down. He knows that too.

  > Tell him you never found it
      He has heard that before and does not believe it, and writes it down
    anyway. There is no bounty for this and it costs you nothing.


THE SLAGWORKS  [town, after rung 34]

    The glow over the ridge is a foundry, and the foundry has been here
    longer than the ridge has. Nothing is smelted here. Things are melted
    down, which is a different job and is done to things that were already
    finished once.

    Two shifts, no gate, and a yard full of moulds stacked in rows going
    back further than the light does. Every one of them has been used and
    every one of them is clean.

    The foreman is called Ossery and he keeps looking at the floor. Not at
    anything on it.

  > THE CRUCIBLE
      Throw something in. What comes out is the same slot and about the same
    worth and is not the same thing, and nobody here will tell you what it
    will be.

  > THE MOLD LINE
      Ground, and the things that go under gear. One shelf, laid out once, and
    there is always a Lightning Rod on it.

  > THE TEMPERING
      Half a rung's bounty and one piece comes out of the fire worth ten more.
    Its name may grow a word. That is the point.

  > THE FOREMAN
      Ossery has been down there. He will say what he heard, or - if you
    already know - he will pay you not to say it back.

  > THE WAY DOWN
      Steps, and under them a county. Five moves of it, once from this town,
    and what you clear down there stays cleared for the rest of the run. Not
    a door either, and it costs you nothing to look.


THE SEALED BID  [the-sealed-bid]  rungs 34 to 36

    The foundry auctions one lot a month and does it the old way. Sarn
    writes the reserve down before anybody arrives, takes one figure from
    each bidder, and holds no second round.

    Over the reserve and the lot is yours at the reserve. Under it and the
    lot is somebody else's, and Sarn reads your figure out anyway, to the
    room, in the voice he reads the winning one in.

  > Name a figure
      One number, written once. Sarn reads the reserve out either way.
      (shut) A bid is a number and you have not got one.

  > Watch
      Somebody else wins it. Sarn reads the reserve out to the room.


THE FORK  [the-fork]  rungs 34 to 37

    The seam forks. One way goes down to a mouth that is boarded from the
    outside; the other comes back up into a yard where the Slagworks has
    laid a shelf out for whoever arrives next.

    Both are yours. Ossery says so and shrugs at being asked, because from
    where he is standing there is no question here at all.

    There is a question. It is which one first, and it is the whole
    question: a shelf before a fight is different gear, and a shelf after
    one is different money.

  > The shelf, then the seam
      Buy first. Whatever you find down there, you find it carrying this.

  > The seam, then the shelf
      Fight first. Whatever you come back up with, you spend it here.


THE COUNTY SURVEYED  [the-county-surveyed]  rungs 13 to 38

    There is a table set up at the side of the road with a map on it and a
    woman holding the map down against the wind with both elbows. The map is
    of a place that is not on the road.

    Her name is Tasker and she takes what the burner told you the way
    somebody takes a parcel they have been waiting on, and then Tasker is
    quiet for long enough that you think you have said the wrong thing.

    "That is a hundred," she says. "A subdivision, and a count. Somebody
    counted it. Somebody kept a box."

  > Ask about the box
      Three locks and three keys. She knows what the third one was for.

  > Ask what she is being paid
      The map is not hers and the table is not hers.

  > Tell her what you have been doing down there
      Ditches, milestones, planks. She writes every one of them down.
      (shut) You have done nothing down there worth writing down


THE PICKET LINE  [the-picket-line]  rungs 20 to 39

    The arena workers have downed tools. There are six demands chalked on
    the board at the gate, they are numbered, and every one of them is about
    the sand.

    Demand four is about armour. Demand four is about *your* armour, which
    is an odd thing to find on somebody else's picket, and it is there
    because Nettle has been raking up after people like you for eleven years
    and put it on the board herself.

  > Honor the line
      The next town's shop is shut to you. Demand four is honoured too.

  > Cross it
      Two rungs' worth in your hand, and your name on the board at the gate.


THE CONSTABLE  [the-constable]  rungs 9 to 40

    The constable is called Wragby and he is waiting at the side of the road
    with his hands behind his back, and he has been waiting a while. He
    knows your name and he says it the way a man says a name he has written
    down.

    There is a matter of a county, Wragby says. There is a matter of
    somebody going about in it and coming back up with nothing to show,
    which is not against anything, and which is the sort of thing that gets
    looked into.

    He is going to take you down and he is not asking. What he does not
    mention, and what is perfectly obvious once the steps start, is that the
    gaol he is taking you to is nowhere near an edge.

  > Go quietly
      Five moves, from the middle, and the middle is a long way in.

  > Explain yourself
      It works. He writes it down and it takes the afternoon.


THE LOCKED GATE  [the-locked-gate]  rungs 23 to 41

    A gate, in good repair, hung on two posts, with a lock on it that
    somebody oils. There is no wall on either side of it and no road behind
    it, and the grass behind it has not been walked on by anything with
    feet.

    The word Halloway gave you is not a key. It is a thing to say, and he
    said it to himself twice before he said it to you, to be sure he had it
    in the right order.

    There is a brass plate screwed to the middle post. It says HOLLIS and
    then a number that is longer than a house number needs to be.

  > Use the word
      It is four syllables and one of them is not a sound. The gate opens.

  > Walk on
      Keep the word. The gate is patient and the gate knows the road.


THE BOLTER RACE  [the-thrumbus-race]  rung 41

    The 45th running, and the paddock is nine deep in people who have an
    opinion about a bolter. A bolter is the fastest thing that has ever been
    bred and looks, standing still, like a mistake.

    There is a book taking bets and a rail you can lean on and a steward
    called Cobb who will let anybody run who signs the form, and the form is
    one line long and the line is about teeth.

  > Back a runner
      Three rungs' worth on the nose. The jackpot is a claim on a whole board.
      (shut) The book has seen your purse and has gone back to the book.

  > Ride
      No stake. Finish, and take something off the paddock rail.


MOLE TOWN  [mole-town]  rung 41

    The highway ends at a town built entirely at ankle height. Not ruined
    and not small - finished, to plan, at that height, with three storeys of
    it above ground and every storey under your knee.

    Everybody here is perfectly polite about the size of you. One of them is
    called Tibb, who is older than the rest, carries a case of tools, and
    has been looking at what you are carrying since you arrived.

  > The little shop
      A curated shelf, at a permanent discount, because nobody your size shops
    here.

  > The mole with the tools
      Four rungs' worth, and he takes a curse off a piece and keeps it.
      (shut) Tibb looks at your purse, and then at you, and says nothing at all.


THE PASSENGER  [the-passenger]  rungs 40 to 42

    A courier called Larkin is carrying something in both hands on the road
    and has been carrying it in both hands for a long time, judging by the
    arms.

    It is a calf. It is a sacred calf and it is the size of a loaf and it
    has to be at the Last Oxen before the road gets there, and Larkin is not
    going to make it and knows it.

    It will not travel in a bag. It rides wrapped in sacking, sitting
    somewhere on you in the open and taking up room you were using - which
    is exactly the rent, and Larkin says so without being asked. Everybody
    who sees it will call it a parcel and nobody will be told otherwise.

  > Take it aboard
      Five rungs of dead cells - put it on a board, because a parcel in the
    tray is riding for free and pays nothing. Lose one fight and it is lost.

  > Wish him luck
      Larkin says thank you and means it, which does not help either of you.


THE WASTE  [the-waste]  rungs 17 to 43

    Somebody has been looking at your gear. Not at the good parts - at the
    grid with nothing in it, which he calls waste ground and which he says
    is a word with a legal meaning.

    The man is called Vessey and improving it is his job. Waste ground that
    stays waste for long enough stops being anybody's, Vessey says, and then
    it is his, and then he improves it.

    He would like to improve yours. Or he would like to bet you that you
    cannot leave it exactly as it is.

  > Let him improve it
      He fills it with something. You do not choose what.

  > Take the bet
      Five rungs. Leave it empty and he pays; fill it and you do.

  > Spoken for
      It is not waste. It is where the third layer goes.


THE GLOW OVER THE RIDGE  [the-glow-over-the-ridge]  rungs 31 to 46

    There is a light over the ridge and it does not go out. It is not a
    fire: a fire moves and this does not, and a fire goes out and this has
    been on since before anybody on this road was born.

    Whatever is under it has been melting things down for a very long time.
    The interesting part is what it has been melting: not ore, which comes
    out of the ground, but *finished things*, which have to be carried in -
    and the road to it goes only one way.

    A carter called Gull, coming the other way, says it is the Slagworks,
    says it the way you would say a word you had been told not to, and does
    not slow down while saying it.

  > Follow it
      Over the ridge and down. It is further away than it looks and then it is
    not.

  > Ignore it
      It is a light. You have a road. The rung pays again for the trouble.


THE FOUNDRY REMEMBERS  [the-foundry-remembers]  rungs 45 to 47

    The glow is behind you and a long way behind you, and there is a man at
    the roadside in Slagworks overalls who has walked further than that to
    be standing here. His name is Rusk and Ossery sent him.

    He says the foundry keeps a book. Rusk says it the way you say a thing
    you have been asked to pass on exactly, and then he passes it on
    exactly.

    Nobody mentioned a book. Nobody mentioned that the crucible was
    counting, either, and it was.

  > "We kept your best"
      You used the crucible once, and the foundry has been holding one back.
      (shut) He checks the page twice. Your column has nothing in it.

  > Say nothing
      Rusk nods, notes it, and walks back. Prices run ahead of you after that.


THROUGH THE CRACKED LENS  [through-the-cracked-lens]  rung 48

    This high up the air stops arguing with light and the lens does what
    Halloway said it would do, which is the thing he was thrown out of every
    observatory on this road for describing.

    It does not magnify. It focuses - on a thing rather than at a distance -
    and what comes into focus is whatever is standing between you and the
    top, in the gear it is standing in, from here.

  > Look through it
      Every board ahead of you, from the loadout screen, for the rest of it.
      (shut) You would need the lens. Halloway offered it to you once, at a price.

  > Keep your eyes on the road
      There is a strong argument for not knowing. It is not a good one.


THE SECOND SHADOW  [the-second-shadow]  rungs 43 to 49

    Your shadow is ahead of you on the road, which happens when the light is
    behind you, and the light is not behind you.

    It is carrying your build. Not gear like yours - yours, the same pieces
    in the same corners with the same one crooked, and it is holding a
    lantern you have never owned and the lantern is what is casting it.

    It has been walking at your pace since the Manse, which is a long way
    back to have been keeping step without once being in front. It has been
    waiting for you to be worth meeting.

    It has stopped waiting.

  > Face it
      Both of them at once. It knows what you are going to do, and does it
    first.

  > Refuse
      It follows. It is in no hurry at all and it has the light.


THE ROAD PAST FRANCIS  [the-unwound]  rung 50

    Francis is down and the road does not stop. It goes on past him for
    about forty yards and then it goes down, and the going down is the part
    the lens showed you.

    Merrik said there was a road under the road and that it would still be
    here when you got this far, and Merrik was right about it the way he was
    right about everything, which is to say he said it once and did not
    explain. Whatever is at the bottom has been unwinding the whole time you
    were climbing.

    The mainspring in your hand is the wrong shape for any lock on this
    road. It is the right shape for that.

  > Go down
      The thing at the bottom is harder than the man you just put down, and it
    does not stop when you do.
      (shut) The way down wants a mainspring, and yours went somewhere else.

  > Turn round
      The road behind you is the whole game and you have just finished it.


THE PALE  [the-pale]  county tile

    A fence with no field behind it. It runs from nowhere to nowhere and it
    is in better repair than anything else in the county, and the gate in it
    is shut with three separate arrangements none of which is a lock.

    There is a board on the gate and the board has a list on it. Somebody
    wrote the list to be read from exactly here, one tile out, and it has
    been read from here a great many times.

  > Hand over an orb and open it
      It goes into the gatepost. You do not get it back.
      (shut) The list is not finished, or you have no orb to give

  > Read the list again
      It says the same thing. It will keep saying it.


THE BOUNDARY DITCH  [the-boundary-ditch]  county tile

    A ditch, and beside it the spoil from the ditch, and standing in the
    spoil a woman called Ordish with a spade she has not put down since
    before you came over the rise.

    She is not digging a new ditch. She is digging the old one out, which
    she explains is a different job and a worse one, and which she has been
    paid for once, forty years ago, by somebody who has since stopped
    existing.

  > Take the other spade
      Two hours. She talks the whole time and none of it is small.

  > Ask what she has turned up
      Forty years of ditch has forty years of things in it.


THE FIELD BARN  [the-field-barn]  county tile

    One barn, in the middle of one field, a long way from any house that
    would want a barn. The door is shut with a stone.

    Inside: hay from a year that was better than this one, a bicycle with no
    chain, and a shelf at head height with things on it that somebody put
    there on purpose and did not label.

  > Take something off the shelf
      It is not stealing if you leave the stone where it was.

  > Sleep in the hay
      An hour, and the roof holds.


THE MILESTONE  [the-milestone]  county tile

    A stone the height of your knee with a number cut into it. The number is
    not a distance. It is not a year either, and it is not the number of any
    road that has ever run past here.

    Somebody has been keeping it clear of the grass. The cut edges are
    sharp, and the stone is older than sharp edges last.

  > Write the number down
      You will know what it is for or you will not.

  > Clear the grass back yourself
      Somebody has been doing this. Now somebody has done it.


THE GLEANERS  [the-gleaners]  county tile

    Four of them working a field that has already been cut, bent over, going
    slowly, picking up what the cutting left. They have the right to be here
    and they will tell you so before you ask.

    The oldest is called Rell and she does not straighten up to talk to you.
    She says the field is worse every year and the right is the same right,
    and both of those are somebody's doing.

  > Glean with them
      Slow, and split five ways at the end of it.

  > Ask who cut the field
      Rell straightens up for this one.


THE POUND  [the-pound]  county tile

    A square of wall with a gate in it, built to hold anything found
    wandering until whoever lost it pays to have it back. There is nothing
    in it now except a great deal of nettle.

    The gate is locked and the wall is four feet high. It has been that way,
    presumably, for as long as anybody has been paying.

  > Pay the fee anyway
      There is a slot in the gatepost and it is not rusted shut.
      (shut) You have not got a bounty spare

  > Step over the wall
      It is four feet high. The nettles are the only guard it has.


THE CHARCOAL BURNER  [the-charcoal-burner]  county tile

    Smoke coming out of a heap of earth, and a man asleep beside it who
    wakes the moment the smoke changes colour and not before. He is called
    Sowerby and he has been in this county longer than the roads have.

    He knows what is under every field for a mile. He says this the way a
    man says what the weather is doing, and then he tells you one of them,
    because you are going up and he is not.

  > Listen
      It takes as long as it takes. The heap does not wait.

  > Watch the heap while he sleeps
      He has not slept properly in nine days and it shows.


THE DROWNED LANE  [the-drowned-lane]  county tile

    The lane goes into the water and comes out the other side, and the water
    in between is the lane as well, and has been since the brook was
    straightened for somebody's convenience.

    There is a plank. The plank is somebody's idea of a bridge and it is
    nobody's idea of a good one.

  > Take the plank
      Quickly, and looking at the far end rather than down.

  > Wade, and mend the plank after
      Wet to the knee, and the next one across will not be.


THE PARISH CHEST  [the-parish-chest]  county tile

    An iron-bound box the size of a coffin, standing on a floor that has no
    building on it any more. Three locks, and the three keys were given to
    three people so that no one of them could open it alone.

    Two of those people are gone and the third is not from here. The box has
    been standing open-lidded to the rain for a long time and the locks
    still work perfectly.

  > Say what the third key was for
      A surveyor up on the road told you, and did not know they had.
      (shut) You do not know what the third key was for

  > Look at what the rain left
      Paper does not last. What is under the paper does.


THE CREVICE IN THE ROCK  [dungeon, the-crevice]

    The thing you sold turns up three rungs later in a hamlet that is not on
    any map you have seen, in the hands of a line foreman who cannot
    possibly have paid for it.

    The hamlet has a new name now. It was Fenmouth when it was a fishing
    village, before the company came and the boys were put on trains and the
    Home for Immature Men was turned into a seed facility. There is one old
    analyst left on the line, and Wenlock still prays to the old gods, on a
    floor that cuts his knees, which he says helps him concentrate.

    He has noticed a purple glint down between the shell and the rock that
    will not move. He has been noticing it for six years and has told
    nobody, because nobody who works here has the shoulders to widen a crack
    in a rock, and he has been very patient about waiting for somebody who
    does.

    The hole in the back wall is a hole in the back wall for about four
    feet, and then it is a staircase somebody cut, and then it is not a
    staircase.

    Wenlock is already ahead of you. He has been ahead of you for six years.

  -- The Reciter --
    The recitation stops mid-verse. Behind the pulpit, the shell has grown
    out over a crack in the rock the way a lip grows over a bad tooth.
    Wenlock gets a bar under it. Wenlock is seventy-one.

  -- The Long Haul --
    The train goes over on the bend. Whatever was in the cars is out in the
    dark now, and it does not appear to want anything from you at all, and
    it does not appear to want anything from Wenlock either, who keeps
    walking and does not look at it once.

  -- The Watchers --
    The Core is soup and light with a piece of somewhere else sitting in the
    middle of it. Wenlock looks at it for a while, and stops being an old
    man, and there is a moment there where he could have kept the lot. He
    splits it instead, the way he always said he would, and puts your share
    in your hand on his way past. Somewhere above you, for the first time in
    a long time, somebody is casting a line.


THE THRESHOLD  [dungeon, the-threshold]

    The man behind the cellar door is called Corvin. He has been talking for
    a long time and he is not talking to you. He is describing a staircase.
    He is describing it very accurately.

    Behind the door there is a staircase.

    Nobody in the Manse comes down here, and everybody in the Manse knows
    exactly how many steps there are, and Corvin is the only one who will
    say the number out loud.

    The door was not locked. Doors like this never are.

    Behind you it is a cellar. Ahead of you it is not, and the difference
    happened somewhere in the middle without a line.

  -- DOORKEEP --
    The thing at the top is called DOORKEEP and it stands aside. It was
    always going to stand aside. What it was doing was making sure you went
    down rather than in.

  -- THE STAIR THAT LISTENS --
    The stair has been counting. Not the steps - there are 402 steps and it
    has known that since before there were steps - it has been counting
    *you*, and the number it has reached is one.

    The stair goes on down and it does not go on down alone. At the count of
    two hundred and one there is a landing off it, and a door in the side of
    the rock, and a light behind the door that does not flicker when the air
    moves.

    The bottom is what Corvin told you about, and he did not mention this.
    Down is the bottom, and whatever is pleased to see you is down there
    waiting. Sideways is the room with the light in it, and whoever keeps
    that room has been keeping it a long time, for a sense nobody upstairs
    has yet.

      > Keep going down
          The bottom is the bottom, and the thing at the bottom is pleased to see
    you.

      > The landing with the light in it
          A door in the side of the rock, at the count of two hundred and one, and
    somebody behind it keeping stock.

  -- THE LAST LANDING --
    There is light at the bottom and the light is a person, or was, and it
    is pleased to see you, which is the worst of it. You come back up seeing
    with the wrong sense, and it does not stop.

  -- THE SHADOW --
    They were not guarding the door. They were keeping the stock, and they
    have been keeping it a long time - everything on these shelves is for a
    sense nobody upstairs has yet, priced by somebody who knew you would
    come down eventually.


THE UNDER-MINE  [dungeon, the-under-mine]

    The mouth of it is boarded from the outside, and the boards are stamped
    HOLLOW KING. He sealed it, and he sealed it from out here, and those are
    two separate things to have found out.

    Somebody sealed this in a hurry and somebody else has been keeping the
    boards in repair for a very long time since, and the two of them were
    not the same person and did not agree.

    The seam was sealed from the outside. Whatever the boards are for, they
    are not for keeping people out.

    Ossery said the foundry keeps melting down what keeps climbing out of
    the melt. He did not say what climbs out of a seam.

  -- THE DIGGERS --
    The diggers put their tools down when you come round the corner and pick
    them up again after, which is the only part of it that is frightening.
    There are fourteen of them, which is the number Ossery gave, and Ossery
    has never been down here.

  -- WHAT THE SEAM HID --
    It was sealed for a reason and the reason is looking at you, and behind
    the reason there is a vein of something the colour of a very old bar of
    chocolate going down further than the lamp goes.


THE UNDERTOW  [dungeon, the-undertow]

    Fenn fished here for sixty years and the water goes down and does not
    come back up, and both of those things were true the whole time he was
    doing it.

    There is a boat pulled up on the shingle with PATIENCE painted on the
    transom, and somebody has left it there, and the paint is not old.

    The water goes down and does not come back up. Neither does the light.

    Sixty years is a long time to fish somewhere nothing swims.

  -- THE CURRENT --
    The water decides how fast you are allowed to be. It decided that about
    Fenn too, for sixty years, and there is no arguing with a decision made
    by a quantity.

  -- THE THING ON THE HOOK --
    It comes up on the line the way a thing comes up when it has chosen to.
    Underneath it the water is deeper than the world is, and you understand,
    all at once, what Fenn was patient about.


DEN RIVALS  [dungeon, den-rivals]

    The exhibit was called THE FURY OF A THOUSAND BEARS, it charged four
    gold, and what it showed you was a diorama.

    The museum never lied. It simply did not say where.

    You counted the eyes. You stopped at forty.

    The exhibit promised the fury of a thousand bears. The museum never
    lied.

  -- THE DEN MOUTH --
    That was a hundred of them and the den goes back further than a hundred,
    and every one of them was in the way rather than in front.

  -- THE THOUSANDTH BEAR --
    The thousandth is the one the diorama was of. The diorama was to scale.
    The placard said A THOUSAND BEARS and did not say to what scale.


WUMPUS WORLD  [dungeon, wumpus-world]

    There are twenty rooms and one of them has a wumpus in it and the wumpus
    does not stay in the room it is in. A card nailed up at the mouth of the
    first says ROOMS 20, HAZARDS SOME, WUMPUS ONE, and somebody has crossed
    out ONE and written it again.

    You will smell it before you see it. That is the good news and it is
    also, on reflection, how it finds you.

    Something in the dark already knows your footsteps.

    You smell it. Worse: that is how it finds you.

  -- DARK FLOOR --
    Whatever lives near a wumpus lives there by being too quick and too many
    to be worth the trouble. Neither is a defence against somebody with a
    torch and twenty rooms to get through.

  -- THE WUMPUS --
    It knew where you were the whole way in. What it did not know is that
    you had stopped moving quietly a hundred yards back and had been
    listening to it work that out. The card at the mouth said WUMPUS ONE,
    and the card was right about the number.


THE SWITCHYARD  [dungeon, the-switchyard]

    The yard is nine rooms under the cutting, and the turntable is the
    first, and from it two lines go off into the dark with points on each of
    them, and a buffer stop at the end of every road.

    The timetable Hesketh sells lists eleven trains a day out of here, and
    Ambrose keeps the times. There are no trains. Something has to be moving
    for a time to be kept, and whatever it is, it is moving to the sheet.

    Four fights down either line. What is at the buffer stop was left there
    on purpose. Nobody who left it expected to be back for it.

    The turntable takes you a quarter of the way round and stops, and the
    bell rings once, and when it turns back you are facing the other way,
    down the yard.

    Somewhere past the lamp the points are already thrown. Ambrose was here
    first. Ambrose is always here first.

  -- THE SHUNTER --
    The shunter goes back to the turntable pit when it is done with you and
    lies down on it, which is what it does between trains, and the turntable
    turns a quarter of the way round under it and stops. Only the down line
    leaves this pit. Ambrose pulled the lever for the up line a long time
    ago and the up line has been a mile of nothing ever since.

  -- THE PLATELAYERS --
    The platelayers put the rail back where it was. They were only ever
    going to put it back where it was. Ahead the ballast dips, and the
    sleepers stop being level.

  -- THE BALLAST --
    The pit is where the ballast came from, and what came up out of it with
    the ballast is still down here, and it goes back into the pit when it
    has finished, and the lamp on the post beyond it is lit.

    Past the ballast pit the Down line splits again, and there is a lamp on
    a post here that says COAL one way and WATER the other, and the lamp is
    lit, and there is nobody to have lit it.

    Both roads end. That was painted on the wall at the top. What they end
    at is the question.

      > The coal road
          It ends at the coal stage. There is still coal in it.

      > The water road
          It ends at the tower. The tank is full and nothing has drunk from it.

  -- THE COAL STAGE --
    The coal stage is a wooden platform with a heap on it and a shovel, and
    the heap is warm, and under the shovel there is a ledger with a row of
    times in it, and the last time is this morning's. Whoever was shovelling
    was here today. What they laid under the boards, they laid for somebody
    with a chest to put over it.

  -- THE WATER TOWER --
    The tank is full. It has been full for as long as the yard has been
    shut, because nothing here has drunk. Under the tower there is a length
    of rodding laid out straight, oiled, and a note pinned to it in
    Ambrose's hand that says FOR THE FEET, which is either a joke or the
    only instruction you are going to get.

  -- THE GANTRY --
    The gantry carries eleven signal arms and all eleven are lowered, which
    is clear, and something up there was pulling them one at a time, and now
    nothing is. Ahead the lamp room door is open and the room is lit.

  -- THE LAMP ROOM --
    Every lamp in the room is trimmed and filled and burning, and the lamp
    room keeper is on the floor, and the lamps go on burning, because a lamp
    does not know. Beyond the room the roads part under the last one.

    The Up line splits under the last lamp, and the two roads run side by
    side for a while before one bends off to the shed and the other straight
    on to the roundhouse, and from the points you can see both ends and
    reach one.

    Ambrose has thrown these too. He throws them every day at 14:05, for a
    train that is not coming, and today they are thrown for you.

      > The shed road
          It ends at the goods shed, and the shed is locked from the inside.

      > The roundhouse road
          It ends at the roundhouse, and something in the roundhouse is in steam.

  -- THE GOODS SHED --
    The goods shed was locked from the inside because the clerk was inside,
    and the clerk is a very careful person and has kept the ledger up to the
    minute, and the ledger is what is worth having: it is enchanted into a
    hat-shaped plate on the counter, because the clerk had a head and wanted
    somewhere to keep the accounts.

  -- THE ROUNDHOUSE --
    It was in steam. It is still in steam. It is on the turntable in the
    roundhouse and it will be on it tomorrow, and the roundhouse is the end
    of the yard in every sense there is. On the driver's seat there is a
    coil of signal wire, wound neat, warm from the boiler, and a ball of
    glass in the firebox that has not melted and is not going to.

